README.md, before:

# Blog

Backups of my posts from [medium](https://medium.com/@andrzejrehmann/) and [codurance](https://codurance.com/publications/author/andrzej-rehmann/).

#### Publications

| Date       | Topic                                                  | Links                         |
|------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 2017-04-29 | Fedora with ZFS and full disk encryption               | [medium][1]                   |
| 2017-08-15 | Encrypt pendrive with LUKS                             | [medium][2]                   |
| 2019-02-11 | Private Jenkins Shared Libraries                       | [medium][3]                   |
| 2019-02-25 | Creating a Jenkinsfile pipeline                        | [medium][4a], [codurance][4a] |
| 2019-05-18 | Microservices Adventures: Ignoring platform complexity | [medium][5a], [codurance][5b] |

[1]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/preparing-fedora-laptop-with-zfs-and-encryption-part-1-f5788dda79ab
[2]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/encrypt-pendrive-with-luks-a58989889d36
[3]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/private-jenkins-shared-libraries-540abe7a0ab7 
[4a]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/creating-a-jenkinsfile-pipeline-7aefc89b8c67
[4b]: https://codurance.com/2019/05/21/creating-a-jenkinsfile-pipeline/
[5a]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/microservices-adventures-ignoring-platform-complexity-b1820d8fb53d
[5b]: https://codurance.com/2019/05/18/microservices-adventures/


#### [Github pages](https://hoto.github.io/blog/posts/)

Publish:

    make gh-pages-release

Commit message:

Add presentation links (#3)
* Add presenations links

* Add all presentation links

* Correct link

README.md, after:

# Blog

Backups of my posts from [medium](https://medium.com/@andrzejrehmann/) and [codurance](https://codurance.com/publications/author/andrzej-rehmann/).

#### Publications

| Date       | Topic                                                  | Links                         |
|------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 2017-04-29 | Fedora with ZFS and full disk encryption               | [medium][1]                   |
| 2017-08-15 | Encrypt pendrive with LUKS                             | [medium][2]                   |
| 2019-02-11 | Private Jenkins Shared Libraries                       | [medium][3]                   |
| 2019-02-25 | Creating a Jenkinsfile pipeline                        | [medium][4a], [codurance][4a] |
| 2019-05-18 | Microservices Adventures: Ignoring platform complexity | [medium][5a], [codurance][5b] |

[1]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/preparing-fedora-laptop-with-zfs-and-encryption-part-1-f5788dda79ab
[2]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/encrypt-pendrive-with-luks-a58989889d36
[3]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/private-jenkins-shared-libraries-540abe7a0ab7 
[4a]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/creating-a-jenkinsfile-pipeline-7aefc89b8c67
[4b]: https://codurance.com/2019/05/21/creating-a-jenkinsfile-pipeline/
[5a]: https://medium.com/@AndrzejRehmann/microservices-adventures-ignoring-platform-complexity-b1820d8fb53d
[5b]: https://codurance.com/2019/05/18/microservices-adventures/

#### Presentations

| Date       | Topic                                                  | Links                         |
|------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 2014-05-11 | Why TDD? Internal presentation for my team at Motorola. Short history of Agile movement, Extreme Programming and benefits of TDD. | [slides][101] |
| 2015-11-18 | High performance AngularJS web pages. Internal Motorola Tech Talk. Overview of what makes a web app slow. Also how to use profiling in Chrome dev tools. | [slides][104] |
| 2016-03-22 | Spinning NodeJS application on AWS in 20 minutes. Public Meetup.  Live presentation how to create and serve simple NodeJS web application using AWS EC2 instance. | [meetup][103] |
| 2016-10-16 | Dockerized build environment. Internal Motorola Tech Talk. Different approaches of using Docker in build pipelines. | [slides][102] |
| 2017-01-18 | Docker and Docker Compose - getting containers to work. Public MotoEdu presentation targeting students. Presented on three different local universities: AGH, Politechnika Krakowska and Jagiellonian University.  What is Docker and Docker Compose. How can it help you in local development and running in production. | [slides][100a], [photos][100b] |

[100a]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1enuVH9QVpHXlSEN9XWhfksd7n0VO6AjSQyjfGBZZ6RE
[100b]: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0BxFnBMPtb0_7TC1zUmF2MGZraE0
[101]: https://slides.com/andrzejrehmann/why-tdd
[102]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1qfphh8I95vfVnqg487WEncKSREXbras_8bg9oE97D3Q
[103]: https://www.meetup.com/Motorola-Software-Developers-Meetup/events/229261688
[104]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1WOrObz9Sum9egyey_CC9z5NTJ6tvwhZcTqbTlz4ldYA

#### [Github pages](https://hoto.github.io/blog/posts/)

Publish:

    make gh-pages-release
